[tutorial] Build a Tooltip element (#740)
lit/lit.dev: packages/lit-dev-content/site/tutorials/content/tooltip/08.md

The tooltip supports good performance via lazy creation, but using the
`lazy` API is cumbersome. In addition, as implemented, the tooltip content
doesn't update when the greeted person's name changes.

A Lit directive can address these issues by encapsulating the tooltip's `lazy`
API. Users of the directive will use an
[element expression](http://lit.dev/docs/templates/expressions/#element-expressions)
on the target element and provide a

> [TemplateResult](http://lit.dev/docs/libraries/standalone-templates/#rendering-lit-html-templates)

Author: Added an aside noting that any Lit value, including rich HTML could be used.

containing the tooltip content.

A scaffold for the directive is setup for you to fill in. The steps are:

1. Make a `TemplateResult` that will render a tooltip with the given content.
1. When the directive is first updated, add a call to the `lazy` API that
renders the `TemplateResult` into a `ChildPart` called `renderPart` and returns
the tooltip element.
1. If the tooltip has already rendered (the `renderPart` exists), update the
part value with the new `result`.

```ts
class TooltipDirective extends Directive {
  isSetup = false;
  renderPart?: ChildPart;
  render(value: unknown = '') {}
  update(part: ElementPart, [value]: Parameters<this['render']>) {
    // 1. Make a TemplateResult that will render a tooltip with provided content.
    const result = html`<simple-tooltip>${value}</simple-tooltip>`;
    if (!this.isSetup) {
      this.isSetup = true;
      // 2. Call the `lazy` API and render and return a tooltip,
      // saving the `renderPart`.
      SimpleTooltip.lazy(part.element, () => {
        const fragment = document.createDocumentFragment();
        this.renderPart = render(result, fragment, part.options);

>         return fragment.firstElementChild as SimpleTooltip;

Author: Fixed.

      });
    // 3. If the tooltip has rendered, update it by setting `renderPart`'s value.
    } else if (this.renderPart) {
      setChildPartValue(this.renderPart, result);
    }

>   }

Reviewer: So, my initial reaction to this is that this is a pretty unnatural factoring if you just came at this from a directive from the beginning, without the `lazy` thingy first, so it sort of obscures a more elegant way to write this as a directive.

It'd be nice if we could just call 
```ts
render(html`<simple-tooltip>${value}</simple-tooltip>`, part.element.nextSibling, {renderBefore: true})
```
but only one directive could do this since that hangs an expando for the part off the reference element. Sort of unsatisfying.

Author: Seems like it would be nice to support passing in the `part` in render.

`this.renderPart = render(value, target.parentNode, {part: this.renderPart, renderBefore: target.nextSibling});`

Author: Perhaps this is better?

```
const renderBefore = target.parentNode.insertBefore(document.createComment(), target.nextSibling);
render(value, target.parentNode, {renderBefore});
```

Author: Simplified to just have the user render the content into the tooltip, avoiding any of these issues.

The tooltip supports good performance via lazy creation, but using the

> `lazy` API is cumbersome. In addition, as implemented, the tooltip content

Reviewer 2: can elide "as implemented"

Author: Done

doesn't update when the greeted person's name changes.

> A Lit directive can address these issues by encapsulating the tooltip's `lazy`

Reviewer 2: link out to directives docs on the words "Lit directive"

Author: Done

API. Users of the directive will use an
[element expression](http://lit.dev/docs/templates/expressions/#element-expressions)
on the target element and provide a
[TemplateResult](http://lit.dev/docs/libraries/standalone-templates/#rendering-lit-html-templates)
containing the tooltip content.

> A scaffold for the directive is setup for you to fill in with the `update`

Reviewer 2: Remove "to fill in"

Author: Done

method already completed. It stores directive `part` and the `tooltipContent`
passed in so you can use them in the methods you'll add: `setupLazy` and
`renderTooltipContent`.

```ts

> update(part: ElementPart, [tooltipContent]: DirectiveParameters<this>) {

Reviewer 2: Can probably remove this snippet since it's not actionable. You can probably also add comments in the `update` method. This step is already running longer than the others

Author: Done

  this.tooltipContent = tooltipContent;
  this.part = part;
  if (!this.didSetupLazy) {
    this.setupLazy();
  }
  if (this.tooltip) {
    this.renderTooltipContent();
  }
}
```

> First add the `setupLazy` method to the directive. It should set `didSetupLazy`

Reviewer 2: suggestion:

> Implement the `setupLazy` method.

Author: Done

so that it's only called once and then call `SimpleTooltip.lazy`. The call to
`lazy` will store the `tooltip` on the directive and then call the
`renderTooltipContent` method that you'll implement next.

```ts
setupLazy() {
  this.didSetupLazy = true;
  SimpleTooltip.lazy(this.part!.element, (tooltip: SimpleTooltip) => {
    this.tooltip = tooltip;
    this.renderTooltipContent();
  });
}
```

Now add the `renderTooltipContent` method to the directive. It will call Lit's
`render` function to render the `tooltipContent` into the tooltip element.
You'll use the part's `renderOptions` so they stay in sync.

```ts
renderTooltipContent() {

>   render(this.tooltipContent, this.tooltip!, this.part!.options);

Reviewer 2: lit's render, since it's not used will be elided by the TS compiler. Make sure to either have a dummy call to it or to include in this snippet to import the render method.

Also you seem to have two imports to 'lit'

Author: Done

}
```

Now open the `my-content.ts` module. That cumbersome code you previously added
to call `lazy` in `firstUpdated` has been removed and the `tooltip` directive
has been imported. Find the greeting and add the directive.

```html
<p>

>   <span ${tooltip(html`${this.name}, there's coffee available in the lounge.`)}>

Reviewer 2: TS compiler elides the `tooltip` import. Please add that import to the snippet

Author: Done

    Hello, ${this.name}!
  </span>
</p>
```

<aside class="info">You're just rendering text here, but since the directive
takes any value Lit can render, it could include rich HTML elements like images
or tables.</aside>

> Finally, interact with the greeting to verify that the tooltip works.

Reviewer 2: I'd implore you to add a congrats step!

before can be the dumb tooltip and after can be this beautiful directified tooltip.

Also tell the user what concepts and docs to read more on that would be related to this or what to learn from here

Author: Done

The tooltip supports good performance via lazy creation, but using the
`lazy` API is cumbersome. In addition, the tooltip content
doesn't update when the greeted person's name changes.

A [Lit directive](https://lit.dev/docs/templates/custom-directives/) can address these issues by encapsulating the tooltip's `lazy`
API. Users of the directive will use an
[element expression](https://lit.dev/docs/templates/expressions/#element-expressions)
on the target element and provide a
[TemplateResult](https://lit.dev/docs/libraries/standalone-templates/#rendering-lit-html-templates)
containing the tooltip content.

> A scaffold for the directive is setup for you with the `update`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A scaffold for the directive is set up for you with the `update`
```

method already completed. It stores directive `part` and the `tooltipContent`
passed in so you can use them in the methods you'll add: `setupLazy` and
`renderTooltipContent`.

Implement the `setupLazy` method. It should set `didSetupLazy`
so that it's only called once and then call `SimpleTooltip.lazy`. The call to
`lazy` will store the `tooltip` on the directive and then call the
`renderTooltipContent` method that you'll implement next.

### simple-tooltip.ts

{% switchable-sample %}

```ts
setupLazy() {
  this.didSetupLazy = true;
  SimpleTooltip.lazy(this.part!.element, (tooltip: SimpleTooltip) => {
    this.tooltip = tooltip;
    this.renderTooltipContent();
  });
}
```

```js
setupLazy() {
  this.didSetupLazy = true;
  SimpleTooltip.lazy(this.part.element, (tooltip) => {
    this.tooltip = tooltip;
    this.renderTooltipContent();
  });
}
```

{% endswitchable-sample %}

Next implement the `renderTooltipContent` method. It will call Lit's
`render` function to render the `tooltipContent` into the tooltip element.
You'll use the part's `renderOptions` so they stay in sync. Also, make sure
to import `render` from Lit.

{% switchable-sample %}

```ts

> import {html, css, LitElement, render} from 'lit';

Reviewer 3: Missing ElementPart?
```suggestion
import {html, css, LitElement, ElementPart, render} from 'lit';
```
